[ALGTOP-L] de Rham (co)homology
jim stasheff jds at upenn.edu 
Mon Aug 13 12:00:40 EDT 2018

Apparently ``cohomology' didn't exist until around 1935 so how did de 
Rham state his theorem?

Is the original article available on line?

jim


Massey's article in/History of Topology/edited by Ioan James, suggesting 
that from 1895 and the inception of homology, it took four decades for 
"dual homology groups" to get onto the serious agenda of topologists.

It happens that 1935 was also the date of a big international topology 
conference in Stalin's Moscow, organised by Alexandrov. This might be 
taken as the moment at which cohomology was "up in the air".

Now de Rham's theorem is definitely somewhat earlier.

Duality on manifolds is quite a bit earlier in a homology formulation.

It is apparently the case that/At the Moscow conference of 1935 /

/both Kolmogorov and Alexander announced the definition of /

/cohomology, which they had discovered independently of one another./

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

[ALGTOP-L] ALGTOP-L Digest, Vol 1835, Issue 1
Dr Theodore Voronov tv at maths.manchester.ac.uk 
Tue Aug 14 20:06:32 EDT 2018

To Jim's question:

A._About the statement of the de Rham theorem. _

A piece of oral tradition: I heard from *Novikov* many times when I was 
a student, that the original form of de Rham's theorem was: /"A closed 
form is exact if all its periods vanish"/.  "Period" means integral over 
cycle (whatever cycle could mean).  In such a form de Rham's theorem is 
presented in the book "Modern geometry. Part 3. Methods of homology 
theory" by Dubrovin, Noviko, Fomenko (see section 1 and section 14). 
Novikov was also saying that the statement was due to Cartan as a 
conjecture.

I would guess that "cycles" meant, originally, cycles of some given 
triangulation. Hence the statement would be that the pairing between de 
Rham cohomology (in modern language) and simplicial homology given by 
integration is non-degenerate, so gives a monomorphism from de Rham 
cohomology to the dual of simplicial homology. One needs epimorphicity 
as well, but perhaps the mono part is the trickiest.

Now, the actual text of de Rham's thesis of 1931 is available on the 
web: http://www.numdam.org/issue/THESE_1931__129__1_0.pdf

I have just looked into it. The "de Rham theorem" part starts in Chapter 
III. On p. 62, de Rham writes:

/"The Stokes theorem shows that the integral of a form homologous to 
zero over a closed field of integration is zero; and that the integral 
of a closed form over a field homologous to zero is zero. The aim of the 
next sections is to establish the converse of these theorems". /

["Field of integration" is a notion de Rham introduces and which is very 
close to the notion of a singular chain. It is a union of elementary 
fields of integration, and each elementary field is given by a map of a 
convex polyhedron into our manifold.]

(So the picture that I learned from Novikov is correct!)

B. _About "homology" and "cohomology"._

The _name_ "cohomology" was relatively late, definitely later than 
the_notion_ itself. And it had not become standard immediately. Below is 
some evidence from a primary source.

As late as 1947, *Pontrjagin* was referring to the characteristic 
classes that he introduced earlier (sometime during the WWII) as 
"characteristic cycles"  (not _co_cycles!). See: L. S. Pontrjagin, 
Characteristic cycles of differentiable manifolds, Math. Sbornik, 1947, 
volume 21 (63), issue 2, pp.233-284.

In that paper, he was working with cycles of a particular codimension 
and using a wrong-way map to pullback a cycle from the Grassmann 
manifold to a given manifold for in order to define for it a 
"characteristic cycle". Effectively he was working with cohomology 
classes via their Poincaré-dual images in homology. When he needed to 
refer to cohomology, he used the term "nabla-homology" (in parallel with 
"delta-homology" for the usual homology). (I think, the same terminology 
was in *Alexandroff*'s "Combinatorial topology", written during the war, 
but published later.) Capital delta was the notation he applied for the 
boundary operator; nabla was notation for the coboundary operator.

In the earlier paper of 1942 (in "Doklady Akademii Nauk"), Pontrjagin  
defined his classes both in terms of differential forms (to which he was 
referring to as "antisymmetric tensors") and obstruction classes in 
simplicial cohomology. Unfortunately, I don't have the paper at hand, so 
I am writing from my recollection of it.

In another work, of 1939, "Homologies of compact Lie groups" (written in 
English; Math. Sbornik, vol. 6 (48), issue 3, pp. 389-422), Pontrjagin 
writes, in the introduction: "The problem of finding topological 
properties of manifolds....is very important for the topology itself as
well as for its applications. ....For its solution in each concrete case 
it is necessary to point out explicitly which type of manifolds is to be 
considered and which topological properties are asked for. *É. Cartan* 
has proposed as such a concrete problem _the question on the homological 
invariants_ of group spaces and homogeneous spaces closely connected 
with them. _He developed a general method of dealing with this question 
consisting in the study of certain skew-symmetrical forms_ and thus 
transposed a geometrical question into the domain of pure algebra."  One 
can see that in 1930s, "de Rham cohomology" was seen as one of several 
versions of "homology" due to Cartan. Also, from Pontrjagin's text 
(where he uses Morse theory to calculate homology of classical compact 
Lie groups) is clear that he does not see a difference between 
"homology" of forms and simplicial singular homology or cell homology 
that he uses. All those to him are clearly just different approaches to 
finding "homological invariants" of manifolds.


Ted Voronov

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

[ALGTOP-L] de Rham's 1955 book
Dr Theodore Voronov tv at maths.manchester.ac.uk 
Sat Aug 18 13:35:45 EDT 2018

In de Rham's book (1955) the statement and proof of the de Rham theorem 
is given in the context close to the theory of distributions in the 
sense of L. Schwarz (or generalized functions in the Russian tradition). 
It is a new approach, though de Rham writes there in the introduction  
that this had been his guiding idea since 1928 (the time of the first 
proof), but which precise implementation became possible due to the 
introduction of distributions by L.Schwarz in 1945.

In brief, de Rham introduces /currents /as linear continuous functionals 
on smooth forms, so that singular chains and forms themselves become 
particular cases of currents. He then states and proves the theorem that 
inclusion of smooth forms into currents gives isomorphism on homology 
(theorem 14 in Ch.4, sect. 18). He uses methods of functional analysis 
for that. He then proves another theorem that homology of currents is 
isomorphic to homology of chains of a polyhedral decomposition (a 
variant of triangulation) of a manifold. His argument uses "mixed" 
objects: products of chains and forms, and he remarks that it is similar 
to Weil's proof that uses covers! He concludes that homology of smooth 
forms and homology polyhedral chains are isomorphic (theorem 16 ibid.) 
That's his new version of the "de Rham theorem"!

Note "homology" for forms, currents and chains alike. In all arguments, 
de Rham considers two parallel cases: arbitrary supports and compact 
supports, and comments on their differences. (He also consistently 
incorporates a possibility of twist by the orientation sheaf.)

But the word "cohomology" makes its appearance as well --- after 
discussing "homology" of forms, etc.! He does introduce cochains, 
coboundary operator and cohomology. "Cochains" are defined linear 
functions on *finite* polyhedral chains. Overall, "cycles" and 
"cocycles" go on an equal footing in de Rham's exposition.

As for the history, in the beginning of Ch. 4, de Rham makes the 
following reference: "The usual notion of homology introduced by 
Poincare is applicable to chains only. Cartan (see [3,4]) and de Rham 
(see [1,2]) extended this notion to forms. Only the introduction of the 
notion of current has made it possible to consider homology between 
chains and forms." The works he makes reference to, are Cartan's papers 
of 1928 and 1929 (on groups and homogeneous spaces); his own paper in 
Comp.Rend. of 1929 and his thesis of 1931. The form of this reference 
may indicate de Rham's desire to stress more independence of his early 
work (?). (Just my guess, can be wrong.)

(I was using the Russian translation of de Rham's book, published in 
1956 with a magnificent foreword by P. Alexandroff. NB: Alexandroff uses 
both "nabla-homology" and "cohomology" there.)

I may comment that this all shows more complicated relation between 
various versions and proofs of de Rham's theorem than one can first 
imagine (e.g. the interrelation of Weil's proof and de Rham's own second 
proof) and more complicated history of the usage/ understanding of 
"homology" and "cohomology".  (As well as understanding of functoriality.)

Ted Voronov

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

[ALGTOP-L] More on the origin of the de Rham theorem
Dr Theodore Voronov tv at maths.manchester.ac.uk 
Mon Aug 20 11:39:53 EDT 2018

_More on Car__tan and de Rham and the origins of the de Rham theorem_*
*

*Cartan*'s 1928 paper:

E. Cartan, Sur les nombres de Betti des espaces de groupes clos, Comptes 
rendus, 187, 196-198 (1928)

is accessible online (see 
https://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k3140x/f196.image).

In this very brief note (3 pages) Cartan presents as a hypothesis the 
following two theorems, saying that "if [they] were demonstrated, the 
determination of Betti's numbers of a compact semi-simple group would be 
reduced to a perfectly feasible problem of algebra."

The theorems are (in a loose translation):

_THEOREM A_:  If the integral of a closed differential p-form is zero 
over all closed domains of integration of dimension p, then it is a 
(p-1)-dimensional integral well-defined in the whole space (and 
connected with original integral by the generalized Stokes formula).

_THEOREM B_:  If there are h non-homologous closed manifolds of 
dimension p, then there are h closed differential p-forms such the 
square matrix of integrals of these forms over these manifolds has 
determinant non-zero.

A note on terminology: Cartan uses "exact differential" [différentielle 
exacte] for "closed form"; and he may refer to a form also as 
"p-dimensional integral" [intégrale multiple d'ordre p]. His "closed 
manifolds of dimension p" [variétés fermées à p dimensions] stand for 
p-cycles, loosely understood . ("Closed" here means compact without 
boundary, so he in fact thinks about homology as a kind of bordism theory.)

In other words, Theorem A states that a closed form for which all 
periods (integrals over cycles) are zero is exact. (Because the word 
"exact" is used for closedness in Cartan's terminology, he has to refer 
to the Stokes formula to say what he means.) This gives a monomorphism 
from cohomology of forms to the dual of homology. Then Theorem B states 
that one can find a dual basis of cohomology classes of forms for a 
given basis in homology, i.e., that there is an epimorphism and indeed 
an isomorphism between the cohomology of forms and homology.

Assuming this hypothesis, Cartan calculates (using forms) the homology 
of compact Lie groups. In the note, he presents the Poincaré polynomial 
for the group SU(n) as an example.

As we see, Cartan's conjectured Theorems A and B are exactly the "*de 
Rham theorem*" --- if one understands homology he refers to as ordinary 
homology. (Following Poincaré, Cartan intuitively presents cycles as 
"closed manifolds" in a given manifold. The idea that there may be 
non-trivial "internal homology" of closed manifolds not mapped anywhere, 
and a whole different (co)bordism theory had yet to emerge. One had to 
wait for Pontrjagin, Rokhlin and Thom for that.)

*De Rham* (in the introduction to his thesis) writes about the above 
theorems: "/...it has been well known for a long time that ///Betti 
/numbers play a role in this theory [of multiple integrals]; but when 
one wants to specify this role, we are led to theorems that have been 
stated in a quite explicit form by Mr. Cartan. We will present here a 
complete demonstration of these theorems, valid for the closed manifolds 
admitting a polyhedral subdivision./" (Here "closed" means compact. 
Probably, compactness was assumed for finiteness of triangulation.)

According to de Rham's biography, once he sees Cartan's note with the 
statements that Cartan conjectured, his "head gets in turmoil" and the 
next day he is "sure to have the solution." (See 
http://sma.epfl.ch/~ojangure/Glimpse.pdf)  This led first to a 
preliminary publication (with the help of Lebesgue) and then to the 
preparation and submission of his thesis, which de Rham defended before 
a commission consisting of Cartan himself as chairman, Montel and Julia. 
De Rham's thesis was dedicated to Mr. H. Lebesgue "with great respect". 
As follows from de Rham's biography, he was indeed very indebted to 
Lebesgue for his kind encouragement in de Rham's essentially independent 
work. (De Rham travelled to Paris only twice for 7 months each before 
1928.)

So the _summary reconstruction_ can be as follows:

(1) A relation between multiple integrals and homology was in the air by 
1928 (perhaps since Poincaré).

(2) The first formulation of a precise form of relation was due to 
Cartan (with some vagueness concerning "domains of integration").

(3) De Rham should have been thinking about these questions 
independently and Cartan's formulation in the CR note was the last 
stroke for crystallizing his understanding; so that de Rham proceeded to 
formulating his own version of Theorems A and B, and proving them. In 
particular, de Rham clarified Cartan's "domains of integration of 
dimension p" by introducing a precise notion of /champs/  (his version 
of singular chains).

De Rham later developed a proof based on "currents", which is connected 
with Laurent Schwarz's distributions, on one hand, and with André Weil's 
double "Cech-de Rham" complex, on the other; and since then we have 
obtained sheaf cohomology, bordisms and cobordisms...  and many other 
good things!.. Cartan's works also led to Chevalley-Eilenberg cohomology 
of Lie algebras... and even to supergeometry and to Q-manifolds of 
today, where a homological vector field Q on a supermanifold, Q^2=0, has 
as its ultimate prototype the Cartan- de Rham differential on 
differential forms!

Ted Voronov